[material-ui][docs] Add first batch of v6 migration (#42242)
mui/material-ui: docs/data/material/migration/migrating-to-v6/migrating-to-v6.md

# Migrating to v6

<p class="description">This guide explains how and why to migrate from Material UI v5 to v6.</p>

## Start using the alpha release

> In the `package.json` file, change the package version from `latest` to `next`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your `package.json` file, change the package version from `latest` to `next`.
```

```diff title="package.json"
-"@mui/material": "latest",
+"@mui/material": "next",
```

> Optionally, if you are using one of these packages, be sure to change the version to `next` too:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optionally, if you are using one of these packages, you can also change their version to `next`:
```

- `@mui/icons-material`
- `@mui/system`
- `@mui/lab`
- `@mui/material-nextjs`
- `@mui/styled-engine-sc`
- `@mui/utils`

Using `next` ensures your project always uses the latest v6 alpha release.
Alternatively, you can also target and fix it to a specific version, for example, `6.0.0-alpha.0`.

## Why you should migrate

> Material UI v6's biggest highlight is the inclusion of Pigment CSS, a next-gen zero-runtime CSS-in-JS library, as an opt-in styling engine.
> Using it will make your project compatible with React Server Components and reduce its bundle size due to the styles extraction, avoiding client-side recalculation.
> 
> Aside from that, the CSS variables API for Material UI is now stable in v6.
> Relying on CSS variables allows for more intricate customization possibilities and better overall DX.
> 
> A major feedback we've learned from the v5 cycle is to reduce the number of breaking changes to the smallest.
> Material UI v6 does exactly that: minimal breaking changes, including only browser support updates and a Node.js version bump.
> These updates can, for the most part, be migrated automatically via codemods.
> 
> Last but not least, Material UI v6 also includes new features, such as container queries and a theme utility for styling different color schemes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Material UI v6's biggest highlight is the introduction of Pigment CSS, a next-gen zero-runtime CSS-in-JS library, as an opt-in styling engine.
Using it will make your project compatible with React Server Components, as well as help reduce its bundle size due to styles being extracted at build time, avoiding client-side recalculation.

As a lesson learned from v5, this major release introduces minimal breaking changes.
Namely, browser support updates, a Node.js version bump, and the removal of the UMD bundle.
These reduced the Material UI package size by 2.5MB, 25% of the total size.

These updates can be, for the most part, migrated automatically via codemods.

Aside from that, v6 also includes a few quality-of-life improvements regarding styling:
- The `CssVarsProvider` API is now stable. That enables you to rely on CSS variables, allowing for more intricate and performant customization possibilities, along with improved overall developer experience
- Support for container queries within the theme
- A new theme utility for adding styles to specific color modes
```

Refining this section a bit more—I felt like it could be polished, as well as mentioning the package size reduction. I'm looking forward to seeing what Sam has to say about this!

## Supported browsers and Node versions

The targets of the default bundle have changed in v6.

The exact versions will be pinned on release from the browserslist query `"> 0.5%, last 2 versions, Firefox ESR, not dead, safari >= 15.4, iOS >= 15.4"`.

<!-- #stable-snapshot -->

- Node.js 18 (up from 12)
- Chrome 109 (up from 90)
- Edge 121 (up from 91)
- Firefox 115 (up from 78)
- Safari 15.4 in both macOS and iOS (up from 14 in macOS and 12.5 in iOS)
- and more (see [.browserslistrc (`stable` entry)](https://github.com/mui/material-ui/blob/v6.0.0/.browserslistrc#L11))

### Removed support for IE 11

Support for IE 11 is completely removed, by dropping the legacy bundle and all IE 11 related code.
This allows us to decrease bundle size and keep the scope manageable.
If you need to support IE 11, you can use Material UI v5's [legacy bundle](https://v5.mui.com/material-ui/guides/minimizing-bundle-size/#legacy-bundle), but it won't get updates or bug fixes.

## Update React & TypeScript version

### Update React

> The minimum supported version of React is v17.0.0 (the same as v5).

Reviewer: Let's add the command to update React here for added convenience

Author: Added.

### Update TypeScript

The minimum supported version of TypeScript has been increased from v3.5 to 4.1.

:::info

> We try to align with types released by [DefinitelyTyped](https://github.com/DefinitelyTyped/DefinitelyTyped) (that is packages published on npm under the `@types` namespace).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We align with types released by [DefinitelyTyped](https://github.com/DefinitelyTyped/DefinitelyTyped) (published on npm under the `@types` namespace).
```

We will not change the minimum supported version in a minor version of Material UI.
However, we recommend not using a TypeScript version older than the lowest supported version by DefinitelyTyped.
:::

If your project includes these packages, you'll need to update them:

- `@types/react`
- `@types/react-dom`

:::warning
Make sure that your application is still running without errors, and commit the changes before continuing to the next step.
:::

## Breaking changes

:::info
This list is a work in progress.
Expect updates as new breaking changes are introduced.
:::

### UMD bundle was removed

To align with React 19's removal of UMD builds, Material UI has also removed its UMD bundle.

> This results in a reduction of the `@mui/material` package size by 2.5MB or 25% of the total package size.

Reviewer: I feel like we should mention this in the "why you should migrate" section — will propose something

> Instead, using ESM-based CDNs such as [esm.sh](https://esm.sh/) is recommended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, using ESM-based CDNs such as [esm.sh](https://esm.sh/) is recommended.
```

For alternative installation methods, refer to the [CDN documentation](/material-ui/getting-started/installation/#cdn).

### Chip

> The Chip component's behavior has been updated to match the standard behavior of other components like buttons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Don't think we need this sentence — there rest explains the same

Previously, the Chip component lost focus when the escape button was pressed, which differed from how other button-like components work.
This issue has been resolved, and the chip component retains focus as expected.

> You can provide a custom `onKeyUp` handler to implement the previous behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to retain the previous behavior, add a custom `onKeyUp` handler, as shown below:
```

```js
import * as React from 'react';
import Chip from '@mui/material/Chip';

export default function ChipExample() {
  const chipRef = React.useRef(null);
  const keyUpHandler = (event) => {
    if (event.key === 'Escape' && chipRef.current) {
      chipRef.current.blur();
    }
  };
  return (
    <Chip
      label="Chip Outlined"
      variant="outlined"
      ref={chipRef}
      onKeyUp={keyUpHandler}
    />
  );
}
```

### Grid v2 (Unstable_Grid)

The spacing mechanism was reworked to use the `gap` CSS property.
This maps better with current layout practices and removes the need for using React Context.
It brings some breaking changes described in the following sections.

> #### The Grid is contained inside parent's padding
> 
> Previously, the Grid overflowed its parent.
> In v6, this is fixed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Removal of the disableEqualOverflow prop

Previously, the Grid overflowed its parent.
In v6, this is fixed, with the Grid being contained inside its parent's padding:
```

I'd have the title say what has changed from a code perspective, and then we can talk about the effect on the description

<img src="/static/material-ui/migration-v5/grid-overflow-change.png" style="width: 814px;" alt="Before and after of the Grid no longer overflowing its parent in v6." width="1628" height="400" />

> This removes the need for the `disableEqualOverflow` prop, so you can remove it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This removes the need for the `disableEqualOverflow` prop:
```

```diff
- <Grid disableEqualOverflow />
+ <Grid />
```

#### Spacing is no longer considered inside the Grid item's box

> Previously, the Grid items included spacing in it's box.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Previously, Grid items included spacing in their boxes.
```

In v6, this is fixed:

<img src="/static/material-ui/migration-v5/grid-spacing-change.png" style="width: 814px;" alt="Before and after of the Grid items no longer including spacing in their box." width="1628" height="400" />

:::warning
Both of these changes might slightly affect your layout.
Note that the items' position doesn't change.
We recommend adopting this new behavior and **not trying to replicate the old one**, as this is a more predictable and modern approach.
:::

## Stabilized APIs

### CssVarsProvider and extendTheme

The `CssVarsProvider` and `extendTheme` APIs are now stable.
If you already use them in v5, you can now drop the experimental prefix.

```diff
- import { experimental_extendTheme as extendTheme, Experimental_CssVarsProvider as CssVarsProvider } from '@mui/material/styles';
+ import { extendTheme, CssVarsProvider } from '@mui/material/styles';
```

Check out the [CSS theme variables page](/material-ui/customization/css-theme-variables/overview/) to learn more about it.

> ### Specific mode styles

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Add styles for specific color modes
```

A bit clearer title, I think

> The `theme.applyStyles` is a new utility for creating style for a specific mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Material UI v6 introduces a new utility for adding styles to specific color modes called `theme.applyStyles`.
```

> It's designed to replace the use of `theme.palette.mode` when applying light or dark styles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's designed to replace `theme.palette.mode` when applying light or dark styles.
```

Should we also mention quickly what's the benefit here (after this sentence)? Like, we introduced A to replace B. Why?

```diff
 const MyComponent = styled('button')(({ theme }) => ({
   padding: '0.5rem 1rem',
   border: '1px solid,
-  borderColor: theme.palette.mode === 'dark' ? '#fff' : '#000',
+  borderColor: '#000',
+  ...theme.applyStyles('dark', {
+    borderColor: '#fff',
+  })
 }))
```

Use these codemods to migrate your project to `theme.applyStyles`:

```bash
npx @mui/codemod@next v6.0.0/styled <path/to/folder-or-file>
npx @mui/codemod@next v6.0.0/sx-prop <path/to/folder-or-file>
npx @mui/codemod@next v6.0.0/theme-v6 <path/to/theme-file>
```

> > Run `v6.0.0/theme-v6` against the file that contains the custom `styleOverrides`. Ignore this codemod if you don't have a custom theme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::info
Run `v6.0.0/theme-v6` against the file that contains the custom `styleOverrides`. Ignore this codemod if you don't have a custom theme.
:::
```

Use callout instead of blockquote

## Deprecations

### Components props

> The `components` and `componentsProps` props have been deprecated for the analogous `slots` and `slotProps`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `components` and `componentsProps` props have been deprecated in favor of `slots` and `slotProps`, making the API surface of the components more consistent.
```

I feel like this is a bit clearer

> This brings consistency between the components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Removing this as I've included in the sentence above.

> For more details on each component, check out the [deprecations page](/material-ui/migration/migrating-from-deprecated-apis/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check out the [deprecations page](/material-ui/migration/migrating-from-deprecated-apis/) to learn which component no longer has these props.
```

# Migrating to v6

<p class="description">This guide explains how and why to migrate from Material UI v5 to v6.</p>

## Start using the alpha release

In your `package.json` file, change the package version from `latest` to `next`.

```diff title="package.json"
-"@mui/material": "latest",
+"@mui/material": "next",
```

Optionally, if you are using one of these packages, you can also change their version to `next`:

- `@mui/icons-material`
- `@mui/system`
- `@mui/lab`
- `@mui/material-nextjs`
- `@mui/styled-engine-sc`
- `@mui/utils`

Using `next` ensures your project always uses the latest v6 alpha release.
Alternatively, you can also target and fix it to a specific version, for example, `6.0.0-alpha.0`.

## Why you should migrate

> Material UI v6's biggest highlight is the introduction of Pigment CSS, a next-gen zero-runtime CSS-in-JS library, as an opt-in styling engine.
> Using it will make your project compatible with React Server Components, as well as help reduce its bundle size due to styles being extracted at build time, avoiding client-side recalculation.
> As a lesson learned from v5, this major release introduces minimal breaking changes.
> Namely, browser support updates, a Node.js version bump, and the removal of the UMD bundle.
> These reduced the Material UI package size by 2.5MB, 25% of the total size.
> These updates can be, for the most part, migrated automatically via codemods.
> Aside from that, v6 also includes a few quality-of-life improvements regarding styling:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Material UI v6's biggest highlight is the introduction of Pigment CSS, a next-gen zero-runtime CSS-in-JS library, as an opt-in styling engine.
Using it will make your project compatible with React Server Components, as well as help reduce its bundle size due to styles being extracted at build time, avoiding client-side recalculation.

As a lesson learned from v5, this major release introduces minimal breaking changes.
Namely, browser support updates, a Node.js version bump, and the removal of the UMD bundle.
These updates reduced the Material UI package size by 2.5MB, 25% of the total size, and can be, for the most part, migrated automatically via codemods.

Aside from that, v6 also includes a few quality-of-life improvements regarding styling:
```

Line breaks and tiny change

We will not change the minimum supported version in a minor version of Material UI.
However, we recommend not using a TypeScript version older than the lowest supported version by DefinitelyTyped.
:::

If your project includes these packages, you'll need to update them:

- `@types/react`
- `@types/react-dom`

:::warning
Make sure that your application is still running without errors, and commit the changes before continuing to the next step.
:::

## Breaking changes

:::info
This list is a work in progress.
Expect updates as new breaking changes are introduced.
:::

### UMD bundle was removed

To align with React 19's removal of UMD builds, Material UI has also removed its UMD bundle.
This results in a reduction of the `@mui/material` package size by 2.5MB or 25% of the total package size.

Instead, using ESM-based CDNs such as [esm.sh](https://esm.sh/) is recommended.
For alternative installation methods, refer to the [CDN documentation](/material-ui/getting-started/installation/#cdn).

### Chip

Previously, the Chip component lost focus when the escape button was pressed, which differed from how other button-like components work.

> This issue has been resolved, and the chip component retains focus as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This issue has been resolved, and the Chip now retains focus as expected.
```

> If you want to retain the previous behavior, add a custom `onKeyUp` handler, as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to keep the previous behavior, add a custom `onKeyUp` handler, as shown below:
```

Just because we used the verb "to retain" in the previous sentence already

```js
import * as React from 'react';
import Chip from '@mui/material/Chip';

export default function ChipExample() {
  const chipRef = React.useRef(null);
  const keyUpHandler = (event) => {
    if (event.key === 'Escape' && chipRef.current) {
      chipRef.current.blur();
    }
  };
  return (
    <Chip
      label="Chip Outlined"
      variant="outlined"
      ref={chipRef}
      onKeyUp={keyUpHandler}
    />
  );
}
```

> ### LoadingButton
> 
> The `children` passed to the LoadingButton component is now wrapped in a `<span>` tag to avoid [issues](https://github.com/mui/material-ui/issues/27853) when using tools to translate websites.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Loading Button

The `children` passed to the Loading Button component is now wrapped in a `<span>` tag to avoid [issues](https://github.com/mui/material-ui/issues/27853) when using tools to translate websites.
```

Check out the [deprecations page](/material-ui/migration/migrating-from-deprecated-apis/) to learn which component no longer has these props.

### System props

System props, such as `mt={*}`, `bgcolor={*}`, and others, are deprecated in the Box, Typography, Link, Grid, and Stack components.
Move all system props into the `sx` prop by using the codemod below:

```bash
npx @mui/codemod@next v6.0.0/system-props <path/to/folder>
```

Or do it manually like the example below:

```diff
- <Button mr={2}>...</Button>
+ <Button sx={{ mr: 2 }}>...</Button>
```

### Theme component variants

Custom component variants defined in the theme are now merged with the theme style overrides, defined within the `root` slot of the component.
Update the theme file using the codemod:

```bash
npx @mui/codemod@next v6.0.0/theme-v6 <path/to/theme>
```

Or do it manually like the example below:

```diff
 createTheme({
   components: {
     MuiButton: {
-      variants: [ ... ],
+      styleOverrides: {
+        root: {
+          variants: [ ... ]
+        }
+      }
     }
   }
 })
```

This reduces the API surface and lets you define variants in other slots of the component.

> ## Pigment CSS integration (optional)

Reviewer: Just a note so we put this at the top (even if we're still building the section)
